---
title: What's New in Bundler
---

## What's New in v1.9

Bundler 1.9 comes with a new dependency resolver, called _Molinillo_, among other changes.

In this section, you’ll find the major features introduced in this release. All
the changes are documented in the Bundler 1.9 changelog.

[Full 1.9 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-9-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

### Using Molinillo for Dependency Resolution

Bundler's dependency resolver is now powered by Molinillo, the CocoaPods
dependency resolution algorithm sponsored by Stripe that is fully documented,
tested, and built for use across different dependency managers built in Ruby.

**Learn More:** [Molinillo](https://github.com/CocoaPods/Molinillo)

### Improved gemspec detection

Directories are now searched resursively for gemspecs, with specs found closer
to the root being preferred.

### Other changes

Bundler 1.9 also includes:

- improved vendoring of `thor` that will make conflicts less common
- fixed gemspecs generated by `bundle gem` from a pre-release bundler version
- `bundle which` will no longer be confused by directories

[Full 1.9 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-9-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

----

## What's New in v1.8

Bundler 1.8 comes with a host of new features to improve gem isolation,
better support for using multi-platform gems in deployment, and faster
`bundle exec` among other changes.

In this section, you’ll find the major features introduced in this release. All
the changes are documented in the Bundler 1.8 changelog.

[Full 1.8 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-8-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

### Enforce Source Hijacking Protection

If a `Gemfile` <em>does</em> have multiple top-level gem
sources, `bundle install` warns when a gem is found in more
than one source. Setting `config disable_multisource` turns
this warning into an error.

### Improved gem lookup

Gems are now looked up across all sources to satisfy dependencies. In addition,
installed gems are now also looked up in remote sources.

### New options for `bundle package`

You can now pass the `--no-install` flag to `bundle package` in order to update
the gem cache, but not actually install gems. `bundle package` also takes a
new `--all-platforms`, enabling caching of gem files for platforms other than
the one bundler is run on. This solves some problems when deploying on a
platform that is different from the development platform.

### Improved templates for new Gems

Creating new gems now includes more metadata in the template, sets the version
appropriately, adds a gem code of conduct file, license setting and appropriate config options.

### Other changes

Bundler 1.8 also includes:

- improved resolver performance
- speed improvements when running `bundle exec` with commands on the `$PATH`
- detection of malformed `Gemfile.lock`
- improved error handling and better explanations
- new shortcuts for git sources from Bitbucket and GitHub Gists
- More configurability

[Full 1.8 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-8-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

----

## What's New in v1.7

Bundler 1.7 is a security release, addressing a vulnerability where a gem
might be installed from an unintended source server. The changes are
limited to fixes for this vulnerability.

[Full 1.7 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-7-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

### Overview

Bundler has always supported fetching gems from multiple gem servers,
but it isn't always clear what gems come from what source. Complicating
this, Bundler has not been consistent about source priority ordering
from one version to another.

Because of this, a `Gemfile` with multiple top-level `source` lines cannot
reliably control the gem server that a particular gem is fetched from.
This might result in installation of gem code from an unexpected source.

Applications that only have a single `source` in their `Gemfile` are not affected.

### Source Selection

You can explicitly select an alternate RubyGems repository for one or more
gems in your `Gemfile` using the `:source` option or a `source` block.
Using multiple top-level gem sources is now deprecated.

[Learn More: Gemfiles](/docs/gemfile.html)

### Ambiguous Source Detection

If a `Gemfile` <em>does</em> have multiple top-level gem
sources, `bundle install` now warns when a gem is found in more
than one source. This is designed to prevent a situation where a gem that
is expected to be found on one gem server is "hijacked" by another server.
For backwards compatibility, the gem is still installed, but Bundler
prints a warning detailing the gem server URL that was used, and listing
others where a gem with the same name was found. Using explicit source
selection suppresses this warning.

### Global Source Ordering

The order that top-level sources are searched is documented as last added
to first added, but prior to version 1.7.0, there was not an automated
test for this ordering, and it was inadvertently reversed in versions
1.5.0 through 1.6.5. The documented ordering is restored in this version,
and is now included in the test suite to prevent regression.

### Upgrading

Bundler adheres strictly to semantic versioning, and version 1.7.0 is
fully backwards compatible with any `Gemfile` that worked with
earlier versions. If you have an application that uses multiple gem
servers in its `Gemfile`, you may see warnings about ambiguous
gem sources after upgrading. Whether or not you see these warnings, the
Bundler team highly recommends that users of multiple gem servers update
your `Gemfile` to use the new syntax.

Use of the new `source` syntax will cause your `Gemfile` to become incompatible
with Bundler versions earlier than 1.7.0. You should only perform this change
after updating Bundler in all of your environments.

1. Choose your primary gem source (usually `https://rubygems.org`) and keep that
at the top of the `Gemfile`

2. For each additional gem source, add a block to the `source` line and move the
relevant gem declarations inside it.

    For example, this `Gemfile`:

~~~ ruby
source 'https://rubygems.org'
source 'https://gems.example.com'

gem 'rails', '4.1.4'
gem 'sqlite3'
gem 'my_gem', '1.0'
gem 'another_gem', '1.2.1'
~~~

might change to this:

~~~ ruby
source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rails', '4.1.4'
gem 'sqlite3'

source 'https://gems.example.com' do
  gem 'my_gem', '1.0'
  gem 'another_gem', '1.2.1'
end
~~~

### Workarounds

If you are unable to upgrade all of your environments to 1.7 immediately,
there are other ways to mitigate this risk by changing your
`Gemfile` to remove the additional sources:

- First, re-evaluate whether the extra gem sources are even needed. If your
application is using a legacy public gem server such as `gems.github.com` or
`gems.rubyforge.org`, all of your required gems should now be synced to
`rubygems.org`. Try removing these sources.

- If you do use gems that aren't available on `rubygems.org`, but are available
from a git source, you can use the `:git` option in the gem declaration and it
will be guaranteed to come from that git repository rather than a gem server.

- If neither of these situations apply, you can unpack the gem into your
`vendor` directory and use the `:path` option when declaring the gem in your
`Gemfile` to point it to the unpacked gem directory. In this case, you should
commit the vendored gem to your source control system.

----

## What's New in v1.6

In this section, you'll find the major features introduced in the release. All
the changes are documented in the Bundler 1.6 changelog.

[Full 1.6 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-6-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

### New Resolver

The resolver has been rewritten to avoid recursion and can now resolve Gemfiles
up to 10x faster than before.

### Bundle console irb alternatives

`bundle console` now supports IRB alternatives Pry and Ripl. If we want to use
Pry, set the `console` Bundler setting: `bundle config console pry`. You'll need
make sure `pry` is in your Gemfile. Now when running `bundle console` it will
open Pry instead of IRB.

[Learn More: Bundle Console](/docs/bundle_console.html)

### Bundle gem extention

Now when creating a new gem, `bundle gem` supports the `--ext` flag which creates
skeleton files for a C-extension. When running `bundle gem newgem --ext`, it
will create some new files in a `ext` directory: `extconf.rb`, `newgem.c`, `newgem.h`.

[Learn More: Bundle Gem](/docs/bundle_gem.html)

### Other Changes

Bundler 1.6 also includes:

- other performance improvements to make resolving and installing faster
- `:git_source` for custom options like :github and :gist
- color highlighting installed or updated gems
- HTTP auth may now be stored in `bundle config`

[Full 1.6 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-6-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

----

## What's New in v1.5

In this section, you'll find the major features introduced in the release. All
the changes are documented in the Bundler 1.5 changelog.

[Full 1.5 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-5-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

### Parallel Install

The `--jobs` option (`-j` for short) installs gems in parallel. For example,
`bundle install -j4` will use 4 workers. We've seen speedups of 40-60% on
fresh bundle installs. To always install in parallel, run
`bundle config --global jobs 4` or set `BUNDLE_JOBS`.

[Learn More: Parallel Install](/docs/bundle_install.html#jobs)

### Gem Source Mirrors

Bundler now supports the ability to use a gem mirror in a Gemfile locally by
using `bundle config`.

~~~
bundle config mirror.https://rubygems.org https://rubygems-mirror.org/`
~~~

[Learn More: Source Mirrors](/docs/bundle_config.html#gem-source-mirrors)

### Ruby Patchlevel

The ruby DSL now takes a `:patchlevel` option for locking to specific
patchlevels of ruby like `ruby '2.0.0', :patchlevel => "247"`

[Learn More: Ruby Directive](/docs/gemfile_ruby.html#patchlevel)

### Outdated Strict

`bundle outdated --strict` displays outdated gems that match the dependency requirements.

[Learn More: `outdated --strict`](/docs/bundle_outdated.html#strict)

### Retry Install

`bundle install` now retries failed downloads. You can adjust the number of
retries with the  `--retry` option.

[Learn More: Retry](/docs/bundle_install.html#retry)

### Other Changes

Bundler 1.5 also includes:

- many smaller performance improvements to make resolving and installing faster
- cyclic dependency detection, to avoid infinite loops
- multiple arguments to the `bundle binstubs` command
- a `bundler` command in case you typo `bundle`
- uses RUBYLIB for better compatibility with Windows

[Full 1.5 changelog](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-5-stable/CHANGELOG.md)

----

## What's New in v1.3

In this section, you'll find the major features introduced in the release. All
the changes are documented in the [Bundler 1.3 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-3-stable/CHANGELOG.md).

### Compatible with Ruby 2 and RubyGems 2

Bundler 1.3 is compatible with Ruby 2.0.0 and RubyGems 2.0.0. The way of the future!

### Compatible with Rails 4

Bundler 1.3 provides the `binstubs` command, which is used by Rails 4 to create
executables that will run inside the context of your Rails app. For example,
`bundle binstubs rspec-core` will create `bin/rspec` that you can run directly
without needing `bundle exec`.

### Install and update speed improvements

Installing a Gemfile with no lock or running `bundle update` used to be
extremely slow in certain cases. In our testing, all of those cases now complete
within a few seconds. In some cases, the install or update completes 150 times faster!

### Support for signed gems

Bundler now supports signed gems! `bundle install --trust-policy` takes the same
arguments as `gem install --trust-policy` does.

----

## What's New in v1.2

In this section, you'll find the major features introduced in the release. All
the changes are documented in the [Bundler 1.2 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/1-2-stable/CHANGELOG.md).

### Specifying a Ruby Version

You can now specify the version of Ruby in the `Gemfile` like the following:

~~~ ruby
ruby '1.9.3'
~~~

That line declares that this application has a dependency on the Ruby VM that is
ABI-compatible with 1.9.3. If the version check does not match, Bundler will
raise an exception. This will ensure the running code matches. You can be more
specific with the `:engine` and `:engine_version` options.

~~~ ruby
ruby '1.9.3', :engine => 'jruby', :engine_version => '1.6.7'
~~~

[Learn More: Ruby Directive](./gemfile_ruby.html)

### Package `:git` and `:path` Dependencies

The `bundle package` command can also package `:git` and `:path` dependencies
besides `.gem` files. This needs to be explicitly enabled via the `--all`
option. Once used, the `--all` option will be remembered.

[Learn More: bundle pack](/docs/bundle_package.html)

### Local Git Repos

Now when developing against a remote git repository, you can use a local
git repo and keep the remote version for deployment. You can do this by
setting a local git override:

~~~
bundle config local.GEM_NAME /path/to/local/git/repository
~~~

For example, in order to use a local Rack repository, a developer could call:

~~~
bundle config local.rack ~/Work/git/rack
~~~

and in your `Gemfile` you would set:

~~~ ruby
gem 'rack', :github => 'rack/rack', :branch => 'master'
~~~

You'll need to reference a git branch, since Bundler will do checks to
ensure you don't work with invalid references. If the branch specified in
the `Gemfile` and the current branch in the local git
repository do not match, Bundler will abort. This ensures that a
developer is always working against the correct branches, and prevents
accidental locking to a different branch.

[Learn More: Git](/docs/git.html#local-git-repos)

----

## What's New in v1.1

[Bundler 1.1 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#110-mar-7-2012)

----

## What's New in v1.0

[Bundler 1.0 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/bundler/bundler/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#100-august-29-2010)
