---
title: "Bundler v2.3: Locking the version of Bundler itself"
date: 2022-01-23 16:07 UTC
tags:
author: David Rodríguez
author_url: https://github.com/deivid-rodriguez/
category: release
---

2021 saw a fair amount of development in the RubyGems & Bundler repositories. We
tried to release more often than ever to catch and fix bugs and distribute our
improvements as early as possible to our users. That has led to 33 patch-level versions
in the Bundler 2.x series released about a year ago.

Our goal for Bundler 2.3 was to implement a long-wanted feature of being able to
fully control the version of Bundler itself an application runs. There's a long
story with this feature, because it was shipped a few years ago in a manner that
was too strict and ended up causing more harm than good, so had to be partially
reverted.

## So, how did things work before Bundler 2.3?

Up until now, RubyGems would try to activate the version of Bundler recorded in
the `Gemfile.lock` file if already installed, and would fall back to the
highest version installed otherwise. That's better than nothing, but it did not
ensure the exact version in the lockfile was always used, which led to
workarounds like [manually parsing the lockfile and then installing that
version](https://bundler.io/blog/2019/05/14/solutions-for-cant-find-gem-bundler-with-executable-bundle.html).

## And how do they work now?

In Bundler 2.3 and up (if you also have RubyGems 3.3 or higher), running
`bundle install` will use the exact version from the BUNDLED WITH section of
the lockfile.  If that version is not installed before you run `bundle
install`, the running version of Bundler will install the locked version, and
then run your original command using the newly-installed locked version.

So, if you have a lockfile ending with

~~~
BUNDLED WITH
   2.2.33
~~~

and you only have Bundler 2.3.5 installed, you'll see the following output when
running `bundle install`.

~~~
$ bundle install
Bundler 2.3.5 is running, but your lockfile was generated with 2.2.33. Installing Bundler 2.2.33 and restarting using that version.
Fetching gem metadata from https://rubygems.org/.
Fetching bundler 2.2.33
Installing bundler 2.2.33
...
~~~~

After that all your commands will automatically use Bundler 2.2.33, as specified
by your lockfile. If you want to upgrade the Bundler version used by your
application, you can run `bundle update --bundler`, and your lockfile will be
regenerated using the latest version. From that moment, all users of the
lockfile will automatically pick up the new version, no matter whether they have
a newer or older version installed instead.

But..

## Why are we doing this?

Being able to lock the version of Bundler itself, just like Bundler is able to
lock other dependencies, has been a goal of the Bundler team for years. There are
a number of benefits of locking your dependencies, like avoiding dependency
nightmares where your application breaks due to third party releases, or
avoiding "works on my machine" issues. Bundler has a ton of features and edge
cases, and

* We sometimes introduce regressions when trying to improve things. Locking the
  version of Bundler prevents those issues from hitting you.

* Once in a while we need to put a security fix out there. Being able to lock
  the Bundler version allows you to ensure that every user of your application
  gets a secure version of Bundler.

* Occasionally, you might want to use a new feature of the Bundler DSL in your
  Gemfile. However, old versions of Bundler don't understand this feature and
  you don't want to suddenly break things for the users of yours that use those
  old versions. With version locking this is no longer a concern. Bundler is now
  able to upgrade itself to the version that your application understands.

All in all, we aim to provide a less surprising, less error prone and more
consistent experience when using Bundler, and let each application be in control
of the version that they use, and the moment that they upgrade.

## What's coming next?

Future enhancements to this feature might include:

* Full support for `gem "bundler", "<arbitrary_requirement>"` in `Gemfile`.
* Automatic update of Bundler when running `bundle install` without a lockfile.
* Automatic update of Bundler when running `bundle update`.

In other words, our end goal is to be able to treat Bundler just like any other
dependency of your application.
