---
title: "Bundler v2.7: last release before Bundler 4"
date: 2025-07-17 07:13 +0000
tags: breaking-changes, bundler-4
author: David Rodríguez
author_url: https://github.com/deivid-rodriguez
category: release
---

A major release of Bundler is finally happening, consolidating unreleased major
changes that had been pending for a decade. It will be named Bundler 4 (skipping
Bundler 3), so that we can release it in lockstep with RubyGems 4, making the
version number of Bundler & RubyGems in sync from now on.

Final Bundler 4 release will happen at the end of 2025, but for now we're
presenting Bundler 2.7 as the last big step towards this major release.

Bundler 2.7 features a `simulate_version` configuration that will allow users to
configure Bundler to behave exactly as Bundler 4 will behave, with all major
breaking changes enabled by default. We encourage all users to enable this
setting, experiment with Bundler 4, and leave us feedback. Community feedback is
super important to us, and we're still open to revisiting the changes that the
final version will include.

You can find more about future Bundler 4 changes and how to enable Bundler 4
mode in our [upgrade
guide](https://github.com/rubygems/rubygems/blob/ff473128011e7abe1eeb0414d9cd48677acb5487/doc/bundler/UPGRADING.md)

In addition to changes to get ready for Bundler 4, Bundler 2.7 also features
some additional improvements such as:

* Our gem generator is now more customizable than ever, displays more
  informative output, and provides a skeleton with better defaults.
* Network errors are better handled to print more actionable errors and avoid
  unnecessary retries that will never succeed.
* Bundler is now more resilient in presence of incorrect lockfiles, or locally
  installed gemspecs with incorrect dependencies.
* Several issues have been fixed to make Bundler play nicer with default gems
  like `rdoc` or `irb`.
* Auto-switch and auto-restart mechanism based on locked version of Bundler has
  been improved.
* `bundle install` can now properly unlock rails (or any other gem including its
  own dependencies as a monorepo) when changing its Gemfile `git` source to pin
  it to a specific `ref`.

Happy bundling!
